[all] (Host-specific APIs) Create a host-specific API model page (#2046)
OfficeDev/office-js-docs-pr: docs/develop/host-specific-api-model.md

---

> title: Using the host-specific API model

Reviewer: I have the same question. As a newcomer, I find seeing 'host' in the article title confusing. My understanding is that host refers to the potential applications one can develop add-ins for (OneNote, Excel, etc), but this was not immediately clear to me when reading the article title and I'm actually still not sure if that's what host means in this context. I think 'host' is a broad word with a lot of potential meanings to developers. Could the title be more specific?

> title: Using the host-specific API model

Author: I'm open to naming suggestions. There's a definite need for a term to describe what we internally call "Rich APIs". Existing articles use "Excel JavaScript APIs", "Word JavaScript APIs", and "OneNote JavaScript APIs" in their respective sections, so I figured that generalizes to "host-specific" APIs. There were also some articles using the "host-specific" term that Kim had added.

My broader hope is that by the end of this refactoring, whatever term we settle on becomes prominent enough to become the obvious alternative to "Common APIs". That way, users see the choice as "do I want to learn about APIs that are common to all hosts or just used by a specific host."

> title: Using the host-specific API model

Reviewer 2: Actually, maybe using a term like "Office hosts" in the L2 will help with this. Also, there are "Host" and "Hosts" elements in the manifest that represent which Office hosts your add-in supports. We don't have to use the manifest term but it's a term the user will need to become somewhat familiar with.

description: 'Learn about the promise-based API model for Excel, OneNote, and Word add-ins.'
ms.date: 07/27/2020
localization_priority: Normal
---

# Using the host-specific API model

> This article describes how to use the API model for building add-ins in Excel, Word, and OneNote. It introduces core concepts that are fundamental to using the promise-based APIs. Note that this model is not supported by Office 2013 clients. Use the [Common API model](office-javascript-api-object-model.md) to work with those Office versions. For full platform availability notes, see [Office Add-in host and platform availability](../overview/office-add-in-availability.md).

Author: I'll reword it to avoid the mention.

> [!NOTE]

> > The examples in this page use the Excel JavaScriptAPIs, but the concepts equally apply to Excel, Word, and OneNote add-ins, as well as SharePoint-embedded Visio diagrams that use the Office JavaScript APIs.

Author: Fixed the space. I really want both parts to be a note, but that looks bad, right?

> > The examples in this page use the Excel JavaScriptAPIs, but the concepts equally apply to Excel, Word, and OneNote add-ins, as well as SharePoint-embedded Visio diagrams that use the Office JavaScript APIs.

Reviewer 2: Maybe make one "IMPORTANT" and the other a "NOTE"

## Asynchronous nature of the promise-based APIs

> The web-based add-ins run inside a browser container. This container is embedded within the Office application on desktop-based platforms, such as Office on Windows, and run inside an HTML iFrame in Office on the web. Enabling the Office.js API to interact synchronously with the Office host across all supported platforms is not feasible due to performance considerations. Therefore, the `sync()` API call in Office.js returns a [promise](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise) that is resolved when the Office application completes the requested read or write actions. Also, you can queue up multiple actions, such as setting properties or invoking methods, and run them as a batch of commands with a single call to `sync()`, rather than sending a separate request for each action. The following sections describe how to accomplish this using the `run()` and `sync()` APIs.

Author: I can't tell what the change is here.

> The web-based add-ins run inside a browser container. This container is embedded within the Office application on desktop-based platforms, such as Office on Windows, and run inside an HTML iFrame in Office on the web. Enabling the Office.js API to interact synchronously with the Office host across all supported platforms is not feasible due to performance considerations. Therefore, the `sync()` API call in Office.js returns a [promise](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise) that is resolved when the Office application completes the requested read or write actions. Also, you can queue up multiple actions, such as setting properties or invoking methods, and run them as a batch of commands with a single call to `sync()`, rather than sending a separate request for each action. The following sections describe how to accomplish this using the `run()` and `sync()` APIs.

Reviewer 2: I suggested you change `...and run inside an HTML...` to `...and runs inside an HTML...`.

> The web-based add-ins run inside a browser container. This container is embedded within the Office application on desktop-based platforms, such as Office on Windows, and run inside an HTML iFrame in Office on the web. Enabling the Office.js API to interact synchronously with the Office host across all supported platforms is not feasible due to performance considerations. Therefore, the `sync()` API call in Office.js returns a [promise](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise) that is resolved when the Office application completes the requested read or write actions. Also, you can queue up multiple actions, such as setting properties or invoking methods, and run them as a batch of commands with a single call to `sync()`, rather than sending a separate request for each action. The following sections describe how to accomplish this using the `run()` and `sync()` APIs.

Author: Thanks! Not sure why GitHub didn't highlight that...

> The web-based add-ins run inside a browser container. This container is embedded within the Office application on desktop-based platforms, such as Office on Windows, and runs inside an HTML iFrame in Office on the web. Enabling the Office.js API to interact synchronously with the Office host across all supported platforms is not feasible due to performance considerations. Therefore, the `sync()` API call in Office.js returns a [promise](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise) that is resolved when the Office application completes the requested read or write actions. Also, you can queue up multiple actions, such as setting properties or invoking methods, and run them as a batch of commands with a single call to `sync()`, rather than sending a separate request for each action. The following sections describe how to accomplish this using the `run()` and `sync()` APIs.

Reviewer 3: I don't know where the suggestion button went but here is a suggestion: 
Office Add-ins are websites which appear inside a browser container within Office hosts, such as Excel.
Then leave everything through Office on the web. Then a space. 
Due to performance considerations, the Office.js APIs cannot interact synchronously with the Office hosts across all platforms. 
Then the rest looks good

## *.run function

> `Excel.run`, `Word.run`, and `OneNote.run` execute a function that specifies the actions to perform against Excel, Word, and OneNote. `*.run` automatically creates a request context that you can use to interact with Office objects. When `*.run` completes, a promise is resolved, and any objects that were allocated at runtime are automatically released.

Reviewer 3: So I don't know what the team's thoughts are globally on this but do we write Promise or promise? Technically it is the caps, but I think the lower case makes more sense

Author: My rule of thumb is that whenever you're talking about the concept, it's lowercase. If you're talking about the code object, it's `Promise`. It's the same logic I use for range versus `Range`.

The following example shows how to use `Excel.run`. The same pattern is also used with Word and OneNote.

```js
Excel.run(function (context) {

>     // You can use the Excel JavaScript API here in the batch function

Reviewer 3: Maybe 
Batch Excel JS API calls here that will execute actions on the Excel Object model

Author: How about "// Add your Excel JS API calls here that will be batched and sent to the workbook."

I almost don't want to mention batching here, since you can have several batches in the `run` call.

    // Catch and log any errors that occur within `Excel.run`.
    console.log('error: ' + error);
    if (error instanceof OfficeExtension.Error) {
        console.log('Debug info: ' + JSON.stringify(error.debugInfo));
    }
});
```

## Request context

The Office host and your add-in run in two different processes. Since they use different runtime environments, add-ins require a `RequestContext` object in order to connect your add-in to objects in Office such as worksheets, ranges, paragraphs, and tables. This `RequestContext` object is provided as an argument when calling `*.run`.

## Proxy objects

The Office JavaScript objects that you declare and use with the promise-based APIs are proxy objects. Any methods that you invoke or properties that you set or load on proxy objects are simply added to a queue of pending commands. When you call the `sync()` method on the request context (for example, `context.sync()`), the queued commands are dispatched to the Office host and run. These APIs are fundamentally batch-centric. You can queue up as many changes as you wish on the request context, and then call the `sync()` method to run the batch of queued commands.

> For example, the following code snippet declares the local JavaScript [Excel.Range](/javascript/api/excel/excel.range) object, `selectedRange`, to reference a selected range in the Excel workbook, and then sets some properties on that object. The `selectedRange` object is a proxy object, so the properties that are set and method that is invoked on that object will not be reflected in the Excel document until your add-in calls `context.sync()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the following code snippet declares the local JavaScript [Excel.Range](/javascript/api/excel/excel.range) object, `selectedRange`, to reference a selected range in the Excel workbook, and then sets some properties on that object. The `selectedRange` object is a proxy object, so the properties that are set and the method that is invoked on that object will not be reflected in the Excel document until your add-in calls `context.sync()`.
```

```js
var selectedRange = context.workbook.getSelectedRange();
selectedRange.format.fill.color = "#4472C4";
selectedRange.format.font.color = "white";
selectedRange.format.autofitColumns();
```

### sync()

Calling the `sync()` method on the request context synchronizes the state between proxy objects and objects in the Office document. The `sync()` method runs any commands that are queued on the request context and retrieves values for any properties that should be loaded on the proxy objects. The `sync()` method executes asynchronously and returns a [promise](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise), which is resolved when the `sync()` method completes.

> The following example shows a batch function that defines a local JavaScript proxy object (`selectedRange`), loads a property of that object, and then uses the JavaScript Promises pattern to call `context.sync()` to synchronize the state between proxy objects and objects in the Excel document.

Reviewer 3: Here promises is caps

```js
Excel.run(function (context) {
    var selectedRange = context.workbook.getSelectedRange();
    selectedRange.load('address');
    return context.sync()
      .then(function () {
        console.log('The selected range is: ' + selectedRange.address);
    });
}).catch(function (error) {
    console.log('error: ' + error);
    if (error instanceof OfficeExtension.Error) {
        console.log('Debug info: ' + JSON.stringify(error.debugInfo));
    }
});
```

In the previous example, `selectedRange` is set and its `address` property is loaded when `context.sync()` is called.

> Because `sync()` is an asynchronous operation that returns a promise, you should always `return` the promise (in JavaScript). Doing so ensures that the `sync()` operation completes before the script continues to run. For more information about optimizing performance with `sync()`, see [Excel JavaScript API performance optimization](../excel/performance.md).

Reviewer 3: Maybe 
Because sync is an asynchronous operation, always return the promise to ensure the sync operation completes before the script runs

Author: Good call. I also added a bit about using `await` in TS/ES6+ JS.

```js
Excel.run(function (context) {
    var sheetName = 'Sheet1';
    var rangeAddress = 'A1:B2';
    var myRange = context.workbook.worksheets.getItem(sheetName).getRange(rangeAddress);

    myRange.load('address');

    return context.sync()
      .then(function () {
        console.log (myRange.address);   // ok
        //console.log (myRange.values);  // not ok as it was not loaded
        });
    }).then(function () {
        console.log('done');
}).catch(function (error) {
    console.log('Error: ' + error);
    if (error instanceof OfficeExtension.Error) {
        console.log('Debug info: ' + JSON.stringify(error.debugInfo));
    }
});
```

> [!NOTE]

> > If you are only calling methods or setting properties on a proxy object, you do not need to call the `load()` method. The `load()` method is only required when you want to read properties on a proxy object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> If you are only calling methods or setting properties on a proxy object, you don't need to call the `load()` method. The `load()` method is only required when you want to read properties on a proxy object.
```

Just like requests to set properties or invoke methods on proxy objects, requests to load properties on proxy objects get added to the queue of pending commands on the request context, which will run the next time you call the `sync()` method. You can queue up as many `load()` calls on the request context as necessary.

#### Scalar and navigation properties

> There are two categories of properties: **scalar** and **navigational**. Scalar properties are assignable types such as strings, integers, and JSON structs. Navigation properties are readonly objects and collections of objects that have their fields assigned, instead of directly assigning the property. For example, `name` and `position` members on the [Excel.Worksheet](/javascript/api/excel/excel.worksheet) object are scalar properties, whereas `protection` and `tables` are navigation properties.

Reviewer 3: I think read-only needs the -

Your add-in can use navigational properties as a path to load specific scalar properties. The following code queues up a `load` command for the name of the font used by an `Excel.Range` object, without loading any other information.

```js
someRange.load("format/font/name")
```

You can also set the scalar properties of a navigation property by traversing the path. For example, you could set the font size for an `Excel.Range` by using `someRange.format.font.size = 10;`. You don't need to load the property before you set it.

#### Calling `load` without parameters

> If you call the `load()` method on an object (or collection) without specifying any parameters, all scalar properties of the object (or all scalar properties of all objects in the collection) will be loaded. To reduce the amount of data transfer between the Excel host application and the add-in, you should avoid calling the `load()` method without explicitly specifying which properties to load.

Reviewer 3: Maybe 
all scalar props of the object or the collection's objects will be loaded

> > [!IMPORTANT]

Reviewer 3: I dunno this seems Excel specific?

Author: Agreed. I'm going to leave the section of exceptions there because I don't have another place to put it yet.

Reviewer 2: Are we aware of any similar exceptions for non-Excel?

Author: @ElizabethSamuel-MSFT, Excel is the only one with a different `load` behavior because of the sheer number of properties in `Range` (and some customers load large Ranges through Graph).

The following code sample sets several format properties of a range by calling the `set()` method and passing in a JavaScript object with property names and types that mirror the structure of properties in the `Range` object. This example assumes that there is data in range **B2:E2**.

```js
Excel.run(function (ctx) {
    var sheet = ctx.workbook.worksheets.getItem("Sample");
    var range = sheet.getRange("B2:E2");
    range.set({
        format: {
            fill: {
                color: '#4472C4'
            },
            font: {
                name: 'Verdana',
                color: 'white'
            }
        }
    });
    range.format.autofitColumns();

    return ctx.sync();
}).catch(function(error) {
    console.log("Error: " + error);
    if (error instanceof OfficeExtension.Error) {
        console.log("Debug info: " + JSON.stringify(error.debugInfo));
    }
});
```

## get&#42;OrNullObject methods

> Some `get*` methods throw an exception when the desired object is not present. For example, if you attempt to get an Excel worksheet by specifying a worksheet name that is not in the workbook, the `getItem()` method throws an `ItemNotFound` exception.

Reviewer 3: isn't
Sorry I forgot to check for contractions throughout, you may want to have a cursory look

> Any `get*OrNullObject` method variant lets you check for an object without throwing exceptions. These methods return a null object (not the JavaScript `null`) rather than throwing an exception if the specified item doesn't exist. For example, you can call the `getItemOrNullObject()` method on a collection such as **Worksheets** to attempt to retrieve an item from the collection. The `getItemOrNullObject()` method returns the specified item if it exists; otherwise, it returns a null object. The null object that is returned contains the boolean property `isNullObject` that you can evaluate to determine whether the object exists.

Reviewer 3: I think you can get rid of attempt to, i.e.
**Worksheets** to retrieve an item...

The following code sample attempts to retrieve an Excel worksheet named "Data" by using the `getItemOrNullObject()` method. If the method returns a null object, a new sheet needs to be created before actions can taken on the sheet.

```js
var dataSheet = context.workbook.worksheets.getItemOrNullObject("Data");

return context.sync()
  .then(function() {
    if (dataSheet.isNullObject) {

>         // Create the sheet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        // Create the sheet.
```

    }

>     dataSheet.position = 1;

Reviewer 3: Do you need this?

Author: I think it highlights the pattern of "if null: create the thing, then do the operation regardless".

Reviewer 2: Might be useful to add a comment to that effect here... e.g., "Do operation on object."

Author: I'll do you one better and make the sample actually functional :-)

    //...
  })
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Just putting a random comment here: you know what might be nice is a flow chart/graphic at the top of this page for people like 
1. Run 
2. Load
etc

Author: We need a good drawing of how proxy objects work in general... I'll add it to the refactoring list.
